1919, Newtonian riots in the armed forces. This is chapter 6 of our series of short stories.
It's part of a sequence where we're explaining what happened and what was going across the
desk of the British Prime Minister, David Lloyd George, in that 1918-1919 period. 1919
when the race riots occurred. But those issues began in 1918 on the Royal Navy when mutinies
occurred from November 1918 when and the crew of a cruiser in Libau, Lithuania refused to sail.
Similarly in the ports of Archangel and Mamansk, Navy crews were mutinying. In January 1919,
the Admiralty warned the British government, the Prime Minister, that sailors were trying to form
a trade union. The Royal Navy ships who were moored around Russia and in Mamansk in 1918 and
1919 refused to sail, partly because they refused to go to war against the Bolsheviks. For the Navy,
the war was over. On the 13th of January 1919, the Royal Navy gunboat, the HMS Kill Bride,
moored in Milford Haven, experienced a mutiny. The crew refused to obey orders and even took
over the ship and flew the red flag instead of the Royal Navy ensign. January 1919 also saw Royal
Navy mutinies in Inver Gordon, Ross Scythe, Devonport and Portsmouth with crews refusing to
weigh anchor and sail for action. And the 645 ton gunboat, the HMS Sekela, when ordered to sail up
the river Davina, exposing itself to Bolshevik guns on the banks of the river, they refused to go.
The Admiral Cohen asked the Admiralty if Britain was actually at war with the Bolsheviks,
as war had not officially been declared, and was told yes. He then arrested five men from the
mutiny and sentenced to death. This was later commuted to five years in prison. The issues
were threefold and this was consistent across the armed forces. The men had had enough of war. They
were generally volunteers or conscripts and they wanted to return home. After all, their war had
been against Germany. Russia versus the Bolsheviks, who had taken over predominantly most of Russia
in the 1917 Civil War, the Navy and later the Army felt this was not their war. In fact,
many respected the Bolshevik cause. But the real problem for government came when soldier
mutiny started. At the start of 19 there was a wave of soldier mutinies at Southwick, Folkestone,
Dover, Osterley Park, Shortlands, Westrom Hill, Felixstowe, Grove Park, Shoreham, Bristol, Aldershot,
Kempton Park, Southampton, Maidstone, Blackpool, Park Royal, Chatham, Fairlop, Biggin Hill,
as well as several London railway stations where troops refused to embark trains for Russia and
France. And troops already in Calais and Archangel formed Soviets and made links with local struggles.
On the 3rd of January 1919, 12,000 soldiers blocked Folkestone Harbour and 2,000 marched in
Dover to the town hall. They were refusing to be sent back to France or to Russia. The common story
was they wanted to be demobilised. The war they signed up for was over. In London, 1,500 soldiers
marched on 10 Downing Street but unsurprisingly the Prime Minister David Lloyd George was out
when they arrived. In 1919 there were more than 50 soldier mutinies and 100,000 soldiers were
involved in those mutinies or as some of them called them strikes but in the armed forces.
Refusing to work is a mutiny. More than anything they wanted to go home and were tired of army
discipline. They were conscripts, they were volunteers. This was not a professional army
that we now see as normal. On the 23rd of January, over 5,000 soldiers arrived in Southampton Docks,
got off their ship to discover they were not going home. Instead the rumours started they
were going to Russia. They formed a soldiers union and mutinied. The army sent General Hugh
Trenchard to bring the situation to an end. This was an uncompromising man, former commander to
the Royal Flying Corps and later to be in charge of London's Metropolitan Police. His task was to
show all army conscripts mutiny would be dealt with in an uncompromising way. The mutiny and
soldiers wouldn't let him into the docks. He then brought in military police and 250 armed
soldiers from Portsmouth who were lined up in front of the mutineers with fixed bayonets and
ordered to cock rifles and instructed to fire on command. Trenchard was believed. All but a
hundred mutineers gave in and the hundred who did not were hosed down with ice-cold water from
Southampton Harbour and then arrested. In Calais on the 26th of January the men of the Army Ordnance
and Mechanical Transport Corps refused to obey orders. They joined with French dock workers to
bring the railways and shipping to a halt. Soldiers at Vendreux camp and women of the
nursing corps in Dunkirk marched to Calais to join the now created Soldiers' Council.
Five thousand soldiers were waiting for ships to go back to Britain. They joined the strike and
soon the number was 30,000 armed forces members. Generals to Julian Bing were sent to stop the
mutiny. Unfortunately he arrived before the two divisions of soldiers who were supposed to
accompany him and when he met the soldiers the strikers took his car and replaced the limousine
with an army jeep. When the divisions arrived many were young and inexperienced. They talked to the
strikers and many changed sides. By now Bing had had enough and with the soldiers he had available
he set up machine gun posts around the camp and ordered surrender or death. He arrested four ring
leaders who he wanted to sentence to death but Winston Churchill, Minister of War, could not
remit risk martyrs so they were imprisoned instead. Now as I've said that's over 50 mutinies,
a hundred thousand soldiers, massive disruption and even soldiers marching from Victoria Stafan
station with rifles at the slope ready down Whitehall. Churchill could see hundreds of them
marching past his window and he admitted later in a book that he was afraid. I remained in my room
a prey to anxiety. Yet unlike West Indian soldiers who were to mutiny in Taranto in Italy because
they were denied a wage increase because of their colour, no white soldier was shot for mutiny in
1919. Those soldiers were to return to haunt black people in particular but to haunt Prime Minister
David Lloyd George later once they became ex-servicemen. But the problem for David Lloyd
George was he simply didn't have an army that was under his control and he had promised those
soldiers in the 1918 general election that he would demobilise them quickly. He was overruled
on that promise by a faction led by Winston Churchill but nonetheless the disillusionment
of the soldiers began.